
PYCIFRW License Agreement (Python License, Version 2)
-----------------------------------------------------

1. This LICENSE AGREEMENT is between the Australian Nuclear Science
and Technology Organisation ("ANSTO"), and the Individual or
Organization ("Licensee") accessing and otherwise using this software
("PyCIFRW") in source or binary form and its associated documentation.

2. Subject to the terms and conditions of this License Agreement,
ANSTO hereby grants Licensee a nonexclusive, royalty-free, world-wide
license to reproduce, analyze, test, perform and/or display publicly,
prepare derivative works, distribute, and otherwise use PyCIFRW alone
or in any derivative version, provided, however, that this License
Agreement and ANSTO's notice of copyright, i.e., "Copyright (c)
2001-2014 ANSTO; All Rights Reserved" are retained in PyCIFRW alone or
in any derivative version prepared by Licensee.

3. In the event Licensee prepares a derivative work that is based on
or incorporates PyCIFRW or any part thereof, and wants to make the
derivative work available to others as provided herein, then Licensee
hereby agrees to include in any such work a brief summary of the
changes made to PyCIFRW.

4. ANSTO is making PyCIFRW available to Licensee on an "AS IS"
basis. ANSTO MAKES NO REPRESENTATIONS OR WARRANTIES, EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED. BY WAY OF EXAMPLE, BUT NOT LIMITATION, ANSTO MAKES NO AND
DISCLAIMS ANY REPRESENTATION OR WARRANTY OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS
FOR ANY PARTICULAR PURPOSE OR THAT THE USE OF PYCIFRW WILL NOT
INFRINGE ANY THIRD PARTY RIGHTS.

5. ANSTO SHALL NOT BE LIABLE TO LICENSEE OR ANY OTHER USERS OF PYCIFRW
FOR ANY INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR LOSS AS A
RESULT OF MODIFYING, DISTRIBUTING, OR OTHERWISE USING PYCIFRW, OR ANY
DERIVATIVE THEREOF, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY THEREOF.

6. This License Agreement will automatically terminate upon a material
breach of its terms and conditions.

7. Nothing in this License Agreement shall be deemed to create any
relationship of agency, partnership, or joint venture between ANSTO
and Licensee. This License Agreement does not grant permission to use
ANSTO trademarks or trade name in a trademark sense to endorse or
promote products or services of Licensee, or any third party.

8. By copying, installing or otherwise using PyCIFRW, Licensee agrees
to be bound by the terms and conditions of this License Agreement.

